A Plan For My Next Five Years
=============================

:date: 2014-05-05 15:46
:category: Personal
:slug: a-plan

On the drive home from school, my father and I listened to the first day of
the `SANS course on strategic planning`__. This was pretty far outside of my
usual knowledge area, and it was an experience I certainly don't regret. The
first day went over all the basics of strategic planning in general, as
opposed to as it applies to security. I've never really done any planning with
my life, and decided I should start doing that.

Mission Statement
-----------------

A mission statement is a reason for existence. I'm sure most people have at
one point thought "why am I alive?", or their purpose in life. I believe that
there is no intrinsic purpose to life, and that purpose is imposed on ones own
self. A mission statement should be long-term and not have a single end-state,
but rather be a guiding philosophy. My best attempt at a mission statement so
far is:

    To have a lasting positive impact on human society.

Dissected, we have the following keywords.

Lasting
```````

The work I do should live beyond a day or week. It's not realistic for
everything I do to be lasting (not much good came out of eating a sandwich),
but starting a company around some social media fad with intent to sell would
be against this mission statement.

Positive
````````

Perhaps obvious, but I do not want to work in a weapons lab designing the next
hottest way of killing people. I recognize the necessity of warfare with the
current state of society, but I myself do not want to work furthering it. This
is perhaps the most nebulous word in my mission statement, given moral
relativity.

Human Society
`````````````

I struggled with the scope of my mission statement quite a bit. A friend
suggested "Why humanity? Why not life?" This is a valid critique, and one I
have no good response to. For now, I think restricting it to human society is
acceptable. Which society? Ideally *all* societies. This ties into "positive".
If something I do benefits only a single society, what impacts does it have on
others?

Vision Statement
----------------

While the mission statement is vague and non-specific, a vision statement
provides the specific end-state to be achieved in a given period of time. My
current vision statement:

    Graduate with a Computer Science degree and get a job in the aerospace
    industry.

This leaves some details out, of course. Why aerospace? Because if I can't be
an astronaut, by golly, I can be a rocket scientist! More realistically, I
think aerospace is really cool and would be a great use of the first few years
after I graduate.

Detailed Plan
-------------

There are three facets to my next five years: academics, research, and work
experience. Academically, I am doing very poorly. That will be another post.
For research, I've been working on the `Rust project`_, and will be working at
Mozilla this summer as a research engineering intern on the same. I love Rust
and I love working with the project, but it started as a hobby and while I'm
quite involved, I don't see myself working on it in my professional life. I'm
also very interested in electrical engineering, and may decide to pursue that
further down the line. After this summer, I plan to double down on my
academics. Next summer, I would like to intern at ARM, nVidia, Intel, or AMD.
Why? They do interesting work, particularly at the boundary between hardware
and software. I've always been interested in that.

The summer after that, I want to spend back home working with the school
district on any technology needs they have. It is amazing how tough problems
can become more manageable with a programmer on hand. After that, I want to try
and land an internship at SpaceX or a similar organization with the
intent of job placement in the aerospace industry. Depending on how these go,
I will either enter industry or continue on to get my Masters degree.

This should give me a solid foundation to move forward after these next five
years.

.. _Rust project: http://rust-lang.org/
.. _SANS: http://www.sans.org/course/security-strategic-planning-policy-leadership

__ SANS_
