The Future of This Week in Rust
===============================

:date: 2014-06-09 14:40
:category: Rust
:slug: future-of-twir

Given that I haven't written a TWiR this week or last, people have been
contacting me asking if I have cancelled it. The answer is, emphatically,
"no". Though I did have my doubts. I've thought about it for a while, and I've
determined what I think is the best path forward for TWiR.

This Week in Rust is bigger than I am. A year ago, I was able to keep track of
every patch and every community project, manually. I created my blog
specifically to write TWiR. In the year since, I have become more busy
(university) and Rust has matured significantly. When I started, there were
really only a few libraries being maintained. Now, new stuff springs up every
week. Don't get me wrong, this is fantastic for Rust! It's not so fantastic
for me, however. I spend around 3 hours every week sifting through pull
requests, reddit discussions, and mailing list posts. This is not a bad thing!
I think it is very worthwhile, and the value This Week in Rust provides to the
community is huge. A quick place to look for recent developments is great
especially for people who can't keep up with the pace of development.  So This
Week in Rust is not going anywhere. But, I think there are a few changes to
make it even better.

TWiR is moving to a dedicated domain, ``this-week-in-rust.org``. This will
keep my personal blog, well, personal. There will continue to be a weekly
newsletter, available on the website, via RSS, and (new!) via email. The
newsletter will be more prose-like than the current list, and feature more
interpretation of the last week's events, rather than just enumerating them.
Besides this, there will be a podcast every other week (transcripts available,
of course), for those who enjoy that sort of thing. On top of that, there will
be at-least-monthly screencasts or otherwise-video media for your
entertainment and edification.

On top of this static content, there will also be a dynamic page that shows
important changes from the past time range. I'm still working out a prototype
of this, but I expect it to be awesome. Snapshots of it should serve well to
augment This Week in Rust. It will feature things such as voting on changes
you find especially important or interesting, and space for further
explanations and QA. All of this will of course be written in Rust.

So no, This Week in Rust is not going away. There is only *more* greatness to
come! Your long-overdue dose of the old-style TWiR will come tomorrow
(covering the last two weeks), and will likely continue until TWiR 56, after
which I hope to have the new site ironed out and ready.

I take bitcoin at ``15WRb3v72EctCXQvkPmpc7nfc1q4i2qbYt``, dogecoin at
``DA4tBcfu9FWSdBVjVf4SweK2bJtdZZL1U9``, and paypal at
``corey@octayn.net``, if you are feeling generous.
